# Treatments

## General Dentistry

General dentistry involves the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of a wide
variety of conditions, disorders and diseases affecting the teeth, gums and
maxillofacial (associated with the jaw and face) region of the body.

General dentists provide services related to the general maintenance of oral
hygiene and tooth health.

Ideally, dentistry is preventative. We recommend that you visit your dentist
regularly – at least once every six months – to ensure proper oral hygiene and
functionality. Regular checkups and oral health maintenance prevent the
development of serious dental problems that can require costly treatment. If
you remain vigilant and visit your dentist regularly, you can enjoy
exceptional dental health.

### Gum Treatment (Cleaning and Scaling)

Gingivitis is a chronic inflammation of the gum tissue (gingiva). Typically
associated with poor oral hygiene, gingivitis is the early stage
periodontitis. Many people are not even be aware that they have gingivitis,
because it is usually not painful.  Periodontitis is an inflammatory condition
affecting the tissues surrounding a tooth, and is the leading cause of tooth
loss. There are a number of causes of gum disease, each of which can be
corrected and controlled.

Gum Treatments: There are a number of treatments available for gum disease
sufferers, each of which varies depending on the severity of the condition. In
order to determine the treatment modality that best meets your needs, your
dentist will evaluate the extent of the damage caused by gum disease to
develop a conservative initial plan. A dental hygiene evaluation will
determine if plaque (soft deposits on the tooth) is being removed on a daily
basis.

Next, calculus (also known as tartar) must be removed through a professional
cleaning, and sometimes through the additional procedures of deep scaling and
root planing. A local anesthetic may be administered during these procedures.
Your dentist may also administer antibiotics to treat bacteria housed in the
pocketed areas of the gum, and recommend a medicated mouthwash to be used as a
regular part of your home regimen.


## Restorative Dentistry
 
Restoration is a term used in dentistry to describe restoring the function of
the tooth by replacing missing or damaged tooth structure. Restorations are
classified as either:

*Direct*: The restoration is fabricated, or made inside the mouth, ie.
composite or amalgam fillings.

*Indirect*: The restoration is made outside of the mouth, ie. dentures,
crowns, bridges, implants, inlays, onlays. Common materials used are acrylic,
chrome, gold, porcelain, and zirconia.

### Dentures 

A denture is a removable replacement for missing teeth and surrounding
tissues. Two types of denture are available; complete and partial dentures.
Complete dentures are used when all the teeth are missing while partial
dentures are used when some natural teeth remain. 
 
*Complete Dentures*
 
Complete dentures can be either "conventional" or "immediate." Made after the
teeth have been removed and the gum tissue has begun to heal, a conventional
denture is ready for placement in the mouth about eight to 12 weeks after the
teeth have been removed.  Unlike conventional dentures, immediate dentures are
made in advance and can be positioned as soon as the teeth are removed. As a
result, the wearer does not have to be without teeth during the healing
period. However, bones and gums shrink over time, especially during the
healing period following tooth removal. Therefore a disadvantage of immediate
dentures compared with conventional dentures is that they require more
adjustments to fit properly during the healing process and generally should
only be considered a temporary solution until conventional dentures can be
made.

*Partial Dentures*
 
A removable partial denture or bridge usually consists of replacement teeth
attached to a pink or gum-colored plastic base, which is sometimes connected
by metal framework that holds the denture in place in the mouth. Partial
dentures are used when one or more natural teeth remain in the upper or lower
jaw. A partial denture can be immediate or conventional also.

### Crown & Bridgework

*Dental Crowns*: Whether a crown is needed for tooth cracks, excessive tooth
decay, damaged tooth protection, teeth grinding, missing teeth, need for
beautification or an improper bite resulting from the natural wear and tear
produced by aging, dental crowns of today can satisfy your functional and
aesthetic needs. The purpose of a dental crown is to encompass and protect a
needy tooth with a custom-designed tooth material, much like a fitted cap. 

*Dental Bridges*: Dental bridges are used to replace missing teeth that would
otherwise adversely affect your mouth. The negative effects of one or more
missing teeth can include the shifting of other teeth to accommodate for the
open space, a change in the bite that may affect your ability to eat, and an
increased risk for periodontal disease and tooth decay. A fixed bridge
replaces one or more teeth by placing crowns on the teeth on either side of
the space and attaching artificial teeth to them. This bridge is then cemented
into place. Not only does a bridge fill in the spaces created by missing
teeth, it prevents other teeth from changing position.

## Cosmetic Dentistry

While traditional dentistry focuses on oral hygiene and preventing, diagnosing
and treating oral disease, cosmetic dentistry focuses on improving the
appearance of a person's teeth, mouth and smile. In other words general
dentistry addresses dental problems that require necessary treatment, whereas
cosmetic dentistry provides elective – or desired – treatments or services.

Cosmetic dentistry may also provide restorative benefits. For example, dental
fillings are a common procedure used to treat decayed teeth. Previously, most
dental fillings were composed primarily of gold, amalgam and other materials
that left visible dark spots on the teeth.

Today, dental fillings may fall into the category of cosmetic dentistry,
because you can select fillings made of porcelain or composite materials that
closely match the colour of your teeth, thus maintaining the natural
appearance of your teeth and smile. 

### Composite Bonding

Chipped, broken, discoloured or decayed teeth may be
repaired or have their appearance corrected using a procedure called
composite bonding. A dental composite material with the look of enamel and
dentin is applied into the cavity or onto the surface of a tooth,
where it is then sculpted into shape, contoured and hardened with
a high-intensity light. The result is a restoration that blends with the
remainder of the surrounding tooth structure and the rest of your natural
teeth to create a healthy, bright smile.

### Teeth Whitening

Teeth whitening is perhaps the most commonly recommended cosmetic dentistry
procedure. Teeth are often stained from smoking, food, drink (coffee,
tea or red wine) or poor oral hygiene. Bleaching the teeth can enhance
the appearance of your smile.

### Dental Veneers
 
Composite or porcelain laminates that are adhesively bonded to the surface of
a tooth to correct and repair chips and cracks will improve a worn
appearance or severe tooth discolouration.
